Allow That

Verse 1;
Our goal is to thrive; and, Survive; this, heartless alliance-
Hopelessly.. hoping for guidance; Can't destroy our souls;
We are soulless; speak more soulful then zions-
-whilst tyrants try-and soldier soldiers into titans..
Are you a nation who speaks or sits in silence.......?!
Through defiance.... defined as reckless and righteous;
Looking onto us for compliance... its violent..
Pretentious pretenders...... who rely on reliance......

Those self centred... who feel that they were selfless;
Convicts who just sit and eat free in detention;
Can't you see that its turning into congestion ...
Ain't hard to be angry when wars is the centre of attention
We conceive with ease and feel the need to believe-
Its acceptable.. though we have free contraception!
We're all being charged; so we'll charge and we'll march!
Won't shout when asked! (Allow that!) hold up your masks!

Hook;
A generation of the lost stuck at the start
Not knowing; where to turn when the light gets dark!
Not growing; nor will learn if their lives age too fast;
Showing you the past can be escaped with a new path! (x2)

Verse 2;
Let's get a few things clear; no trivia...
Obama's bombing Libya... women and kids; the deliverer;
Of friendly fire; though you know it was deliberate;
In other words an inconsiderate idiot;
Quick to kill the innocent; when incidents are similar;
Well .... ? -more close to home in particular!
For that he sheds a tear; I guess he laughs about the majors!
Focus on what's near; then, defends us from the dangers!

They say that soon we will all meet our makers;
But the problem is; that, the takers won't take us..
Or make us; try to hate; trust, religion based around a made up-
-Guy who never made us.......... a mistake so why's he famous..?
A man with many names though he's nameless...
My theory is we came up; through, evolution stayed tough;
Though they try to shame us we are shameless..
We made love..... no body can; or, ever will tame us!!

Verse 3;
Its sometimes hard to find the words to say;
What I'm feeling hurts in ways & leaves me feeling burnt for days;
Looks like its time to turn away...
Naaaarrrh! ALLOW THAT!
Who would I be; if I didn't try to turn and chase
And face demons that lay in wait for me to reach the gates of fate
No one can follow the paths that you've chosen ....
Cah all of the roads that lead their are broken....
Do youths cause trouble? -no! feds provoke them
We're a part of the problem for being out spoken
I'm part of the solution that's why you see me toking
&Choking; laugh when I'm asked what is this Im smoking!
An eye for an eye would make the whole world blind
But who would wanna fight if everyone was high!
I'm not stupid I; know the legal lies my legal rights!
But listen out for peoples crys its just one word its legalise!